I wonder about this when you
have men and women who are on the front
lines and they're putting their life at
risk and they've been there for like a
week and a half I used to think this
about the oil riggers in Alberta too
they go off and they have a couple of
days off and they want to blow off some
steam and so they have a rius party and
rius parties are where stupid things
happen but but but having said that I
don't exactly understand how much steam
you do have to blow off in order to be
able to tolerate the life that you're
leading that high stress anything is
possible at a moment's notice life and
so I don't know how
much off duty discipline let's say it's
reasonable and realistic to insist upon
now you know I've already said I know
what alcohol contributes to these sorts
of situations but by the same token you
know it's like how much do people need
to let off steam and so I'm I'm kind of
curious about what you think about that
you've been you've been around men in
those situations for for very long time
um and and I'll say again I mean you're
right and and it's whether it's uh in
the officer's mess or the privates mess
or the office Christmas party um that
kind of stuff but so so I know and there
was a lot of uh the drinking went on and
but I honestly I never felt threatened
and I none of they and so you would be
in a mess I'm thinking up in the Gold
Line Heights for example there's maybe
40 or 50 and there's two girls three
girls three women up there and uh
and I I didn't see it I saw them getting
like getting drinking too much perhaps
and then out came the arguments over the
Maple Leafs versus the Canadians and
singing the regimental songs and and
somebody got you know when the karaoke
machines came out it was bad news and
then it was but you were still if you're
on a military base there's still
regulations right the mess closes
everybody go goes back and you're
sleeping in your quarters and so I
honestly I saw more sort of fist fights
break out than I saw kind of a sexual
anything with a sexual overtone and
things have changed since then as well
by the way I mean you know all our
missions now are are essentially you
don't drink they're they're dry missions
all Afghanistan was all dry except when
you got off the island off the uh the
mission and went into Kuwait or or
wherever ships are all dry now right I
mean when they're at Sea when they're at
Sea so when they pull up into into Shore
then you have parties and you have uh so
on and so forth so that's been rectified
so things have changed a lot I mean when
I was commanding officer from you know '
89 to
91 already started some young officers
saying well no I don't want to go to
happy hour in my day you know when I was
a young officer it was you know on
Friday nights you go to happy hour
here's a beer here's a cigarette you're
going to smoke you're going to drink and
that's to PL is you know I'm
exaggerating obviously but but uh by the
time you know so early 90s then you know
young men and women were becoming more
fit I said no I you know glass glass of
orange juice and that'll be just great
and they you know it's 6 o' I'm going
home that's it you know in the old days
we'd party till 11: every Friday night
so there so the evolution of uh I say
generational evolution of these aspects
of of let's call it the organizational
culture because I know you want to talk
about culture to some degree they've
evolved and they've evolved um as much
because of the participants in the
culture as they have from
organizational dictum um you know
there's been a sense of okay we need to
modernize this um but a lot of people
are finding other outlets for that um
letting off steam as you characterized
it a lot of it is there is a lot of
Fitness there's it's different it's
different as it is in society it's
different but that doesn't mean it still
doesn't happen it doesn't mean that
people are still not going to get drunk
and do stupid things yeah but there
there's a difference between getting
drunk and doing stupid things and
getting drunk and doing nasty malicious
um uh things um and and that's where and
this is it is hard and in the premise of
your how do you make that distinction
well you you have to say you have to
establish expected Norms of behavior and
those evolve over time what was
acceptable 30 20 years ago
um is not necessarily acceptable not
because it's politically correct but
just because we we've changed so you
know um drinking its seed I use that as
an example I I was the one in fact that
that banned drinking at sea for a
variety of reasons including and I the
way you characterized your your previous
research experience was it was like deja
vu it was the senior non-commissioned
members of the Navy at a particular
board meeting who who said to me Admiral
we're telling you 99% of our problems
are alcohol related all this misconduct
you can bend it all into if they weren't
drunk at the time
the chances of them having done whatever
it was was pretty slim to none so
there's there's the you know there go my
people I am their leader so I must
follow them this is what you you were
getting this from the from the troops
they were telling you the senior
leadership the the the senior
non-commission they're telling me we
have a problem and we need you Admirals
wearing your big pants to do something
about it so we said okay let's look at
this let's study it to the best we can
in the cont of our own little ecosystem
and let's come up with some Progressive
approaches that didn't ban it entirely
because that would be punitive
reasonable and and just silly and that
doesn't just accept the status quo but
says okay you know what drinking a SE is
dangerous first of all because you're
operating extreme it's like Dr it would
be using your oil rig analogy they don't
allow them to drink on an oil rig for
very good uh reasons so they can keep
their hands right or not kill somebody
accidentally because they're drunk um so
let's how about that as a thought
process and yes so that that evolved
over time um but I think we also have to
remember that the military the armed
forces are more generally conservative
so for change to happen they used to say
what was it the it's the only thing
harder than getting a new idea in the
military mind is taking out an old idea
you know and it's but but it's true it
changes slowly but Navy hundreds of
years tradition not impeded by progress
exactly kind of right jokes they're
jokes but come from somewhere they come
from somewhere and in fact so so you
have to but you know you look at this
evolution of of alcohol and and all that
and it's it's uh and so is there a big
culture change required I'm with Barbara
I think uh no I I think you know you
need to make sure that people understand
that uh you know that that you have to
you know respect others
and uh in in all kind of ways and
everything and and you root out those
those Predators but and you're not alone
that was the big thing that's the
hardest thing for me when I see on TV
when something happened a victim says
this happened to me and there was
nowhere to turn to and I I have a real
hard time with that because the military
okay it's huge it's a family you've got
you've met people throughout your whole
care even if you've been in two or three
years you've got people you were on this
course with or trained with and so your
chain of command is not welcoming to
your a failure leadership it that barb
to your point when you see these things
they are fundamentally failures in
leadership well I'm curious too though
well are they fa so so you pointed out
very early on that you hadn't
experienced the sorts of things okay but
I'm wondering too like there's a
cultural element to that a sociological
element let's say but there's also a
personal element like I'll give you an
example of this Daughters of Alcoholics
are more statistically likely to marry
alcoholics now we don't know why that is
we don't know if they find men who are
drinking and because that they're
accustomed to that they pick those men
or we don't know if they covertly
reinforce their husbands for drinking to
the point where they become alcoholic
but it's such a widespread phenomena
that if you're doing genetic analysis of
the transmission of alcoholism you have
to take into account this issue of
assortive mating it's called okay so now
the the issue is was there a manner in
which you conducted yourself personally
that made you less likely to be the
target of such unwanted attention that
might have to do with alcohol
consumption and then also is it
reasonable to assume that your
experience is emblematic of the
experience of females in the military or
were you for for whatever reason
protected personally or more
fortunate um so first of all women that
join the military I think tend to be
well certainly in my time they tended to
be like not everybody's going to want to
join the military so I think that maybe
they're a little bit more outspoken I
don't know um I would say that like it
didn't happen to me but I didn't see it
happening around me and I was close to a
lot of women in the military and nobody
you were there early yeah and but nobody
came like even at the end of my career
when I was in ndhq and and you like
nobody would I I didn't hear about
people saying this happened to me you
know what are we going to do about it I
think that the majority of women it
didn't happen to and I think that the
ones that did yes absolutely they should
they should you know seek justice but I
also think that to say there was nowhere
to go I mean you had your peers you had
your the Padres we have Padres that
doors open all the time you had a
medical staff you had um somebody that
you worked with on a course you had
there was so many
Avenues yeah the and the the physical
training guys that and girls like there
were so many places that you could go
for help I find it astonishing when I
hear this happened to me and it happened
to me over and I had nowhere to turn to
that I I really have a hard time with
that I really so now when you entered
the
military what
response what response did you get from
the man well okay so we don't and and we
put okay so nowadays you wouldn't have
like our Lockers in the military police
like it wasn't a changing locker but we
kept our gun in there and like you know
our ticket books and all that sort of
stuff so you were never there undressed
but so we were all together men and
women and there wasn't one Locker that
didn't have Miss January or whatever you
know in the thing so nowadays that's
just not cool and So I responded to that
by going getting member Bert Reynolds in
Cosmopolitan and I put him up in my
locker and we never had a problem with
that again you know like it just you
know the GU said I'm not looking at that
every day so well and then that was it
and then and and it took a while but I I
think that I I didn't I don't think it
was hostile I think it was more um they
didn't know how to act I had a flat tire
once in my police in Edmonton you know
how cold it is there I a flat tire nope
I know how to change tire so I'm
changing the tire and I do see another
military police car go by fine change
the tire I Comm in the usual ribbing you
know just like the guys would get but
this one um military police Corporal
he's waiting he's waiting at the end Rel
he says barbar he said listen he said I
drove past you today I said yeah I saw
you and he said I didn't know what to do
right right he said if it had been Mike
I would have stopped help but I thought
you were going to say I you think I
can't do this didn't I don't I didn't
know what to do and I said next time
stop effing car kind of thing and we
were cool after that right and and but
that was the kind of things that I was
they didn't really know what to do they
didn't really know how to deal with it
and and this idea that we're men and
women are interchangeable I have a hard
time with that too okay so I want to
really have a hard time with that soad
well let's talk let's talk a little bit
about
that so I might as well get myself in
trouble right off the bat
[Music]